Don't trust the experts

A recent encounter with my dentist left me somewhat poorer and curious about when we shouldn't trust experts. As far as I can tell, my dentist is knowledgable and provided me with honest advice And yet the end result of our interaction was that I spent several hundred dollars on a night guard that I only wore for a couple weeks. The cynical explanation is that she sold me something I didn't need solely to pad her income, but I think there may be more nuanced factors in play.

We frequently rely on expert opinions to make our own decisions when acquiring the relevant knowledge on our own is difficult or impossible. Healthcare provides obvious examples, but others include environmentalists urging radical action to save an endangered species or a contractor recommending that you repaint your deck. When the opinion may be flawed in some way. it can be rational to simply accept the risk that the opinion is faulty. The key question is whether the harm of trusting an incorrect opinion is greater than the cost of obtaining the information for yourself.

With that in mind, what are some factors that should make you skeptical of an expert's suggestion, even if you think they're knowledgable and trustworthy?

**Direct financial interest:** Frequently, the expert you're consulting stands to make money if you follow the suggested course of action. This is the most obvious and least interesting factor, particularly because it strains the definition of trustworthy.
**Indirect financial interest:** The general advice of lawyers everywhere in every possible legal scenario is "talk to a lawyer." This seems good for the industry as a whole, even when the lawyer giving the advice doesn't stand to benefit directly.
**External validation:** An environmentalist who has devoted her life to a particular minnow wants other people to validate her devotion by sharing her concern.
**Status seeking:** The same environmentalist gains status when more people care about the minnow. 
**Reluctance to do nothing:** Professionals struggle when forced to confront the limits of their own ability. This leads to suggesting approaches that provide little or no benefit while inflicting substantial downside. Oncologists seem particularly prone to this.
**Availability heuristic:** An experienced physician who has seen rare, horrifying maladies may suggest disproportionate preventative measures. Reasoning about rare events is challenging, particularly when they provoke a visceral reaction.
**Different preferences:** A dermatologist probably cares more about having perfect skin than you do and will suggest skincare routines that don't reach your own cost/benefit threshold.
**Narrow perspective:** The expert may focus on solving a particular problem without considering broader impact. This is what got me with the dentist: wearing a night guard probably was optimal for my dental health, and buying one for $400 could have saved me money and pain in the long term. But it also reduced the quality of my sleep, which is a top-level concern for me. So now the mouthguard lives in my nightstand, unused.

Looking over the list, it's  clear that the concerns apply to self-proclaimed experts as well as actual experts! False prophets are prone to the same mistakes as genuine prophets. Anti-vaccination activists check most of the boxes on the list above, and indeed some of the points apply to them more clearly than their physician counterparts. Jenny McCarthy has gained more status (in certain quarters) through her anti-vaccination activism than any living physician has gained from promoting vaccines.

A more general theme is preference mismatch. The first five points listed amount to the expert imposing their own preferences, while the latter portion reflects a failure to understand your preferences. s